SLEP010 n_features_in_ attribute (#22)
scikit-learn/enhancement_proposals: slep010/proposal.rst

.. _slep_010:

=================================

> SLEP010: n_features_in_ attribute

Reviewer: this is being treated as markup. Put it in ``` ` ``` or  ``` `` ```

=================================

:Author: Nicolas Hug
:Status: Under review
:Type: Standards Track
:Created: 2019-11-23

Abstract
########

This SLEP proposes the introduction of a public ``n_features_in_`` attribute
for most estimators (where relevant). This attribute is automatically set

> when calling ``_validate_X()`` or ``_validate_X_y`` which are meant to replace

Reviewer: ```suggestion
when calling new methods on ``BaseEstimator`` -- ``_validate_X()`` or ``_validate_X_y()`` -- which are meant to replace
```

> ``check_array`` and ``check_X_y`` (which are still called under the hood).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
``check_array`` and ``check_X_y`` in most cases, calling those under the hood.
```

Motivation
##########

Knowing the number of features that an estimator expects is useful for

> inspection purposes, as well as for input validation.

Reviewer: Add that "There are other cases where stateful input validation is required and this change also lays the foundations for such future enhancements". Or does that go elsewhere?

Author: we put it below to separate proposal with implementation

Solution
########

The proposed solution is to replace most calls to ``check_array()`` or
``check_X_y()`` by calls to two newly created private methods::

    def _validate_X(self, X, check_n_features=False, **check_array_params)
        ...

>     def _validate_X_y(self, X, check_n_features=False, **check_X_y_params)

Reviewer: y is absent here. Should it be?

        ...

The ``_validate_XXX()`` methods will call the corresponding ``check_XXX()``
functions.

The ``check_n_features`` parameter is False by default and can be set to True
to raise an error when ``self.n_features_in_ != X.shape[1]``. The idea is to

> leave it to False in ``fit()`` and set it to True in ``predict()`` or

Reviewer: Should we instead have `_validate_for_fit` and `_validate_after_fit`???

Author: Can you give an example that would handle both `check_n_features` and `check_column_names`?

Does `_validate_after_fit` also counts as `_validate_for_subsequent_calls_to_partial_fit`?

Reviewer 2: Forgot about this point. I'm -.5 on having ``check_n_features``. I'm not sure if two methods are the way to go (though it might be good?).
My suggestion was to have a parameter ``fit=True`` (or ``initial_fit`` or ``fresh_fit`` or ``new_fit`` or even ``reset``).
This is also relevant when having ``warm_start``. Then it's even different for calls to ``fit``.

If we want to do two methods ``_validate_for_fit`` sounds good but the other one is harder to name, unless we say ``_validate_after_fit`` means ``_validate_after_initial_call_to_fit``.
Which wouldn't be too bad but maybe slightly misleading?

Reviewer: Is it rather `_validate_fit` and `_validate_consistency`? I'm happy with  `_validate_data(initial=True)` or `_validate_data(reset=True)`.

I think the point is that where we really want the two validation methods to differ is whether they are storing state or checking against state. The `X` vs `X_y` distinction is confusing outside of supervised learning

Reviewer: Thoughts here? Is `_validate_X` and `_validate_X_y` the right pair of methods?

Reviewer 2: Sorry this was hidden for some reason. I think ``_validate_data`` is better.
I'm also ok with ``_validate_fit`` and ``_validate_consistency``. Though one might argue it should be ``_validate_initial_fit`` or something like that? but maybe that's splitting hairs.

``transform()``.

In most cases, the attribute exists only once ``fit`` has been called, but
there are exceptions (see below).

A new common check is added: it makes sure that for most estimators, the
``n_features_in_`` attribute does not exist until ``fit`` is called, and
that its value is correct.

The logic that is proposed here (calling a stateful method instead of a

> stateless function) is a pre-requisit to fixing the dataframe column

Reviewer: ```suggestion
stateless function) is a pre-requisite to fixing the dataframe column
```

> ordering issue: at the moment, there is no way to raise an error if the

Reviewer: quote number... not everyone reading this is a core dev.

"There is no way" -> "There is no way with stateless check_array"

column ordering of a dataframe was changed between ``fit`` and ``predict``.

Considerations
##############

The main consideration is that the addition of the common test means that
existing estimators in downstream libraries will not pass our test suite,
unless the estimators also have the `n_features_in_` attribute (which can be
done by updating calls to ``check_XXX`` into calls to ``_validate_XXX``).

Note that we have never guaranteed any kind of backward compatibility

> regarding the test suite: see e.g. `#12328

Reviewer: (We should probably support the `:issue:` role in this repo)

<https://github.com/scikit-learn/scikit-learn/pull/12328>`_, `14680
<https://github.com/scikit-learn/scikit-learn/pull/14680>`_, or `9270
<https://github.com/scikit-learn/scikit-learn/pull/9270>`_ which all add new

> checks.

Reviewer: These are categorically different, since estimators implemented according to our developers' guide would continue to work after these checks were added. The current proposal does not do that, without an update to the developers' guide, hence making the new requirement force the version of scikit-learn with which an estimator is compatible.

Author: What about when `check_classifiers_classes` was introduced (can't find the original PR)?

That check fails on `HistGradientBoostingClassifier` with its default parameters (n_samples_leaves=20 is too high for this dataset with 30 samples).

And `HistGradientBoostingClassifier` is definitely implemented according to our developers guide.

I'm sure we have tons of instances like that where our tests are so specific that they will break existing well-behaved estimators.

Reviewer 2: StackingClassifier and StackingRegressor required a change in the common tests (I think sample weight tests), so adding those sample weight tests also would have broken other estimators that are implemented according to the developers guide.

In some sense the requirement added here is qualitatively different in that it requires a new attribute. But I'm not sure if that's a difference in practice. We add a test and the third-party developer has his test break, and needs to change the code to make the test work.

I'm not sure if it makes a difference to the third-party developer whether the breakage was due to an implicit detail of the tests or an explicit change of the API. I would argue the second one might actually be less annoying.

What is unfortunate about the change is that it makes it hard for a third-party developer to be compatible with several versions of scikit-learn. However, I would suggest that they keep using ``check_array`` and implement ``n_features_in_`` themselves.

If/when we do feature name consistency, this will might be a bit trickier because it might require a bit more code to implement, but I don't think it's that bad.

Reviewer: What I'm asking is that these aspects be considered and noted, so that the vote on the SLEP takes this into account rather than allowing the reviewers to miss this compatibility issue.

There are other minor considerations:

- In most meta-estimators, the input validation is handled by the
  sub-estimator(s). The ``n_features_in_`` attribute of the meta-estimator
  is thus explicitly set to that of the sub-estimator, either via a
  ``@property``, or directly in ``fit()``.
- Some estimators like the dummy estimators do not validate the input
  (the 'no_validation' tag should be True). The ``n_features_in_`` attribute
  should be set to None, though this is not enforced in the common tests.
- Some estimators expect a non-rectangular input: the vectorizers. These
  estimators never have a ``n_features_in_`` attribute (they never call

>   ``check_array`` anyway).

Reviewer: That's no excuse. They *should* applicable for `check_array`... What should their behaviour be were they tested, or were someone implementing a vectorizer?

Author: I don't understand your comment.

Are you simply suggesting to make clear that `n_features_in_` doesn't make sense here since their input isn't a `n_samples x n_features` matrix?

Reviewer: I'm saying that you should remove "(they never call  ``check_array`` anyway)" because there should be a policy stated here for such estimators, regardless of whether they are currently tested sufficiently.

Reviewer: But there should be a way for them to comply with the new requirements and pass `check_estimator`.

- Some estimators may know the number of input features before ``fit`` is
  called: typically the ``SparseCoder``, where ``n_feature_in_`` is known at
  ``__init__`` from the ``dictionary`` parameter. In this case the attribute

>   is a property and is available right after object instanciation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  is a property and is available right after object instantiation.
```

.. _slep_010:

=====================================
SLEP010: ``n_features_in_`` attribute
=====================================

:Author: Nicolas Hug
:Status: Under review
:Type: Standards Track
:Created: 2019-11-23

Abstract
########

This SLEP proposes the introduction of a public ``n_features_in_`` attribute
for most estimators (where relevant). This attribute is automatically set
when calling new methods on ``BaseEstimator`` -- ``_validate_X()`` or

> ``_validate_X_y()`` -- which are meant to replace ``check_array`` and

Reviewer: What is the status of these methods in terms of API compatibility? Do we document them similarly to public methods? I don't think we have any other instances of "protected" (in the Java sense) API that we provide compatibility guarantees on.

Indeed, would it be more consistent to establish these as public helper functions which nonetheless take `self` (or `est`) as a first argument and mutate its attributes?? Doing so would also make it easier for downstream packages to backport the latest `_validate_X` implementation.

Reviewer 2: These are two separate points, right, public/private and method/function.

public vs private: Do we want to have backward compatibility guarantees for these? In terms of API or in terms of behavior? If we add checking of column names, that's not backward compatible behavior and we're certainly planning that.

method vs function:
from a pure design point a method seems like the right thing to do. I do agree with it being easier to backport a function. In what settings would they want to backport that, though?

Reviewer 2: Or I guess the column name checking would need deprecation anyway and then it's backward compatible?

Reviewer: The point is that we can't suddenly require the caller of this method to pass an additional param.

Column name checking could be FutureWarninged for a while, or could be regarded as a bug fix.

Reviewer 2: Sorry I don't follow your first point. Was are you arguing for?

If it's private, we could (in theory), right? And are you thinking about something specific or just in general?

those under the hood.

Motivation
##########

Knowing the number of features that an estimator expects is useful for
inspection purposes, as well as for input validation.

Solution
########

The proposed solution is to replace most calls to ``check_array()`` or

> ``check_X_y()`` by calls to a newly created private method::

Reviewer: When we say "private" do we mean that we do not authorise third party libraries to rely on this API?

Author: yes. I added a note.

Solution
########

The proposed solution is to replace most calls to ``check_X()`` or
``check_X_y()`` by calls to two newly created private methods::

    def _validate_X(self, X, check_n_features=False, **check_array_params)
        ...

    def _validate_X_y(self, X, check_n_features=False, **check_X_y_params)
        ...

The ``_validate_XXX()`` methods will call the corresponding ``check_XXX()``
functions.

The ``check_n_features`` parameter is False by default and can be set to True
to raise an error when ``self.n_features_in_ != X.shape[1]``. The idea is to
leave it to False in ``fit()`` and set it to True in ``predict()`` or
``transform()``.

In most cases, the attribute exists only once ``fit`` has been called, but
there are exceptions (see below).

A new common check is added: it makes sure that for most esitmators, the
``n_features_in_`` attribute does not exist until ``fit`` is called, and
that its value is correct.

Considerations
##############

The main consideration is that the addition of the common test means that
existing estimators in downstream libraries will not pass our test suite,
unless they update their calls to ``check_XXX`` into calls to

> ``_validate_XXX``.

Reviewer 3: We can also have a deprecation period for this test in estimator checks.

Reviewer 2: This is not really true / the point, right? They don't need to use our private methods, though they can. They "just" need to provide ``n_features_int_``. The mechanism they use for that doesn't matter. Again I would separate interface and implementation more.

There are other minor considerations:

- In most meta-estimators, the input validation is handled by the
  sub-estimator(s). The ``n_features_in_`` attribute of the meta-estimator
  is thus explicitly set to that of the sub-estimator, either via a
  ``@property``, or directly in ``fit()``.
- Some estimators like the dummy estimators do not validate the input
  (the 'no_validation' tag should be True). The ``n_features_in_`` attribute
  should be set to None, though this is not enforced in the common tests.
- Some estimators expect a non-rectangular input: the vectorizers. These
  estimators never have a ``n_features_in_`` attribute (they never call
  ``check_array`` anyway).
- Some estimators may know the number of input features before ``fit`` is
  called: typically the ``SparseCoder``, where ``n_feature_in_`` is known at
  ``__init__`` from the ``dictionary`` parameter. In this case the attribute is

>   set in ``__init__``.

Reviewer 3: I think at the end we also need a CC copyright notice.

Author: It is automatically added in conf.py

Author: Oh OK looking at other PRs I understand what you meant, I added the section below

.. _slep_010:

=================================
SLEP010: n_features_in_ attribute
=================================

:Author: Nicolas Hug
:Status: Under review
:Type: Standards Track
:Created: 2019-11-23

Abstract
########

This SLEP proposes the introduction of a public ``n_features_in_`` attribute
for most estimators (where relevant). This attribute is automatically set
when calling ``_validate_X()`` or ``_validate_X_y`` which are meant to replace

> ``check_array`` and ``check_X_y`` (they are still called under the hood).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
``check_array`` and ``check_X_y`` (which are still called under the hood).
```

Motivation
##########

Knowing the number of features that an estimator expects is useful for
inspection purposes, as well as for input validation.

> The logic that is proposed here (calling a stateful method instead of a

Reviewer 2: This is about the implementation and not the interface, right? Or rather about the private interface. I would try to make a clear separation between the goal and public interface (i.e. having ``n_features_in_`` and what it means and when we have it) and the implementation (i.e. ``_validate_X`` and ``_validate_X_y``.

Author: > This is about the implementation and not the interface, right? 

Yes, but that's still a motivation I think?

Reviewer 2: Motivation for what?
For having ``n_features_in_``? Not really, right?

What is the slep proposing? I thought it was ``n_features_in_``, not ``_validate_X``.

Author: Is the SLEP supposed to be only about the goal and not at all about the proposed solution?

If that's the case then fine, but if the solution is to be discussed, we might just as well sell it too?

Reviewer 2: I think the slep should be about both, but I think it should be clearly separated what the goal is (``n_features_in_``) and what the proposed solution is. I think it's confusing to motivate both in the same paragraph.

Author: I'll move that below then

stateless function) is also a pre-requisit to fixing the dataframe column
ordering issue: at the moment, there is no way to raise an error if the column
ordering of a dataframe was changed between ``fit`` and ``predict``.

Solution
########

> The proposed solution is to replace most calls to ``check_X()`` or

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The proposed solution is to replace most calls to ``check_array()`` or
```

    def _validate_X_y(self, X, check_n_features=False, **check_X_y_params)
        ...

The ``_validate_XXX()`` methods will call the corresponding ``check_XXX()``
functions.

The ``check_n_features`` parameter is False by default and can be set to True
to raise an error when ``self.n_features_in_ != X.shape[1]``. The idea is to
leave it to False in ``fit()`` and set it to True in ``predict()`` or
``transform()``.

In most cases, the attribute exists only once ``fit`` has been called, but
there are exceptions (see below).

> A new common check is added: it makes sure that for most esitmators, the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A new common check is added: it makes sure that for most estimators, the
```

``n_features_in_`` attribute does not exist until ``fit`` is called, and
that its value is correct.

The logic that is proposed here (calling a stateful method instead of a
stateless function) is a pre-requisit to fixing the dataframe column
ordering issue: at the moment, there is no way to raise an error if the
column ordering of a dataframe was changed between ``fit`` and ``predict``.

Considerations
##############

The main consideration is that the addition of the common test means that
existing estimators in downstream libraries will not pass our test suite,
unless the estimators also have the `n_features_in_` attribute (which can be

> done by updating calls to ``check_XXX`` into calls to ``_validate_XXX``).

Reviewer 2: I think given that this was the main concern it should be discussed a bit?
I would argue that we constantly change ``check_estimator`` and add new requirements, and that we have never guaranteed that tests will be forward-compatible.

Reviewer: Calling `_validate_XXX` will not work if the downstream library supports Scikit-learn < 0.22. They will need to backport BaseEstimator from 0.22, or handle two cases.

Reviewer 3: We have done such things to support different versions of scipy or python, I don't see how that should be a blocker. We can have clear guidelines in our docs and tell people how they can handle it, or even backport these methods to older versions.

There are other minor considerations:

- In most meta-estimators, the input validation is handled by the
  sub-estimator(s). The ``n_features_in_`` attribute of the meta-estimator
  is thus explicitly set to that of the sub-estimator, either via a
  ``@property``, or directly in ``fit()``.
- Some estimators like the dummy estimators do not validate the input
  (the 'no_validation' tag should be True). The ``n_features_in_`` attribute
  should be set to None, though this is not enforced in the common tests.
- Some estimators expect a non-rectangular input: the vectorizers. These
  estimators never have a ``n_features_in_`` attribute (they never call
  ``check_array`` anyway).
- Some estimators may know the number of input features before ``fit`` is

>   called: typically the ``SparseCoder``, where ``n_feature_in_`` is known at

Reviewer 4: If the goal of this document it so third party libraries know about the API change, recommending developers to set an attribute in `__init__` seems like bad practice?

  ``__init__`` from the ``dictionary`` parameter. In this case the attribute is

>   set in ``__init__``.

Reviewer 2: Shouldn't it be set by a property? Setting it in ``__init__`` is not allowed, rght?

Author: I'll use a property to also address @thomasjpfan concerne but we are already setting `self.components_ = dictionary` in  `__init__`

Reviewer 2: That's only possible because this estimator is not tested in the common tests.
Maybe we should run ``check_estimator`` on it separately?
